Values and Special Tastes
We are now in a position to create a new brand of vehicle,
starting from all the varieties of Vehicle 3, by working on the
connections between sensors and motors. They were, up to now, of
two very simple kinds: the more the sensor was excited, the faster
the corresponding motor ran, or, alternatively, the more the sensor
was excited, the slower the motor ran. We did not care what the
rules of the dependence were, as long as they were of the nature
"the more, the more" or "the more, the less." The vast class of
mathematical functions describing such dependences is sometimes
called monotonic. Obviously, there is something very simpleminded about creatures governed by such unconditioned likes or
dislikes, and we can easily see how such the-more-the-merrier behavior could lead to disaster. Think what happens in the case of a
tendency to follow downhill slopes!
Let us consider the following improvement. The activation of a
certain sensor will make the corresponding motor run faster, but
only up to a point, where the speed of the motor reaches a maximum. Beyond this point, if the sensor is activated even more
strongly, the speed will decrease again (figure 6). The same sort of
dependence, with a maximum efficiency at a certain level of sensor
16
V
VEHICLE 4
I
Figure 6
A nonlinear dependence of the speed of the motor V on the intensity of
stimulation I, with a maximum for a certain intensity.
activation, can be engineered for the inhibitory connections between sensor and motor. We may set the maximum efficiency of the
various sensors at any level we choose, and we may even play with
dependences having more than one maximum. Any vehicle constructed according to this prescription we will assign to a new
brand, labeled 4a. Of course, if you like, you can keep some of the
connections of the old monotonic type and mix them with the
nonmonotonic ones in every possible combination.
You will have a hard time imagining the variety of behavior
displayed by the vehicles of brand 4a. A 4a vehicle might navigate
toward a source (as Vehicle 2b would) and then turn away when
the stimulus becomes strong, circle back and then turn away over
and over again, perhaps describing a trajectory in the form of a
figure eight. Or it might orbit around the source at a fixed distance,
like a satellite around the earth, its course being corrected toward
the source by a weaker stimulus and away from the source by a
stronger stimulus, depending on whether the stimulus intensity is
17 Values and Special Tastes
on one side or the other of the maximum describing the sensorymotor dependence (figure 7). Vehicle 4a might like one sort of
stimulus when it is weak but not when it is too strong; it might like
another stimulus better the stronger it becomes. It might turn away
from a weak smell and destroy the source of a strong one. It might
visit in alternation a source of smell and a source of sound, turning
away from both with a change of temperature.
Watching vehicles of brand 4a in a landscape of sources, you will
be delighted by their complicated trajectories. And I am sure you
will feel that their motives and tastes are much too varied and
intricate to be understood by the observer. These vehicles, you will
say, are governed by INSTINCTS of various sorts and, alas, we just
don't know how Nature manages to embody instincts into a piecе
of brain.
You forget, of course, that we have ourselves designed these
vehicles.
But instincts are a lowly sort of behavior anyway. We can do
better. Let us improve on type 4a by adding a new sort of connection between sensors and motors. This time the influence of the
sensor on the motor is no longer smooth; there are definite breaks.
There might be a range of intensities of sensory stimulation for
which the motor is not activated at all and then, under stronger
stimuli, the motors are running at full speed. Or else, there might be
smooth changes of motor activation for certain ranges, with abrupt
changes in between. A very lifelike pattern would be: no activation
up to a threshold value of the stimulus, and increasing activation
beyond the threshold, starting with a certain fixed minimum (figure
8). You are by now experienced in the art of creative invention and
will have no difficulty dreaming up more schemes of this sort.
In a way these new vehicles, which we call 4b, are already contained in the vast class of vehicles 4a, since abruptness of behavior
can of course be simulated with any degree of approximation by
functional dependences that are in reality, mathematically speak-
S
1
S
Figure 7
Trajectories of vehicles of brand 4a around or between sources.
S
19 Values and Special Tastes
V
I
Figure 8
Various bizarre kinds of dependence of the speed of the motor (ordinate)
on the intensity of stimulation (abscissa) in Vehicle 4b.
ing, continuous. Moreover, if friction plays a role, as we have already decided it should, thresholds in motor activation would ensue
naturally: the vehicle will start moving only when the force exerted
by the motor exceeds a certain value, sufficient to overcome the
initial friction.
Whatever their origin, thresholds in some behavior patterns
make a lot of difference in the eye of the observer. These creatures,
the observer would say, ponder over their DECISIONS. When you
come close to them with a lure, it takes them some time to get
going. Yet once they have decided, they can act quite quickly. They
do indeed seem to act in a spontaneous way: none of this passive
being attracted one way or the other that was so obvious in the
vehicles of the more lowly types. You would almost be tempted to
say: where decisions are being made, there must be a WILL to make
them. Why not? For all we know, this is not the worst criterion for
establishing the existence of free will.
Vehicle 5
Logic
At this point we are ready to make 